In 1955, Walt Disney opened Disneyland
in Anaheim, California, introducing the
world to his vision for a new thing, a
theme park. More than a mere amusement
park, Disney's park would be clean,
well-kept, a place for family
entertainment. It would feature a main
street modeled loosely on his hometown
of Marceline, Missouri. Within
Disneyland, every experience, view, and
interaction will be carefully curated to
make you feel like you're in this
magical bubble. Then you leave the park,
Cross Harbor Boulevard, and the bubble
bursts. You're met with wide suburban
arterial streets, strip malls, and
motel. Walt himself hated this
juxaposition. He even anticipated the
problem and tried to encourage a friend
to purchase the land next to his so at
least he could have some say in what
would go there, but his friend declined.
Later, his friend would say that was one
of the biggest business mistakes of his
life. But at the time, people were
betting against Disney and Disneyland.
After the eventual success of
Disneyland, Disney eventually went on to
buy 25,000 acres in central Florida,
where he could build multiple theme
parks and surround them with vast swaths
of natural area, shielding his guests
from anything that could pierce the
Disney bubble. The story I just told you
is kind of the origin story of the Walt
Disney Resort in Florida. It also
implies that Walt Disneyland was the
first park. Walt Disney World is the
ultimate park, the closest reflection of
Walt Disney's true vision, the better
resort, basically. And I'm here to tell
you that that assessment is wrong.
Disneyland is better, at least from an
urbanism point of view. And the
commentary about how bad Anaheim is is
just blown out of proportion. Now, I
know apologist for suburbia, but at
least there's a mix of land uses near
the park entrance, unlike Walt Disney
World, which is basically ex urban
sprawl and a countyized gated community.
But while Disneyland may be better,
there are other parks out there with
even better land use neighbors. The
question I'm interested in is where's
the best place to put a theme park?
Let's find out after the bike belt.
If you feel like you're having deja vu,
like you've seen this video before, it
could be because you've watched Ray's
City Nerd video a couple months ago on
this very topic. This is what happens
when two urbanist YouTubers attend the
same conference in Anaheim. But while
Ray does a nice job comparing Disneyland
and Anaheim, I'm going to talk a little
more about how the relationships between
park and city differ between resorts.
It's sort of fascinating how different
Disneyland and Walt Disney World are,
but also how different they are compared
to Tokyo Disney or Universal Studios
Japan. Consider my video just another
part of the discussion on the topic of
theme park urbanism. Okay, let's get on
with the discussion of theme park
urbanism with a deep dive into the two
US Disney parks, starting with the
original. And I want to get started by
putting them in context a little bit.
Disneyland is in Southern California, a
region anchored by the city of Los
Angeles. Los Angeles County is right
here. Fun fact, LA County with its 9
million people is more populous than 40
of the 50 US states. There's lots of
people in there. But right next door to
LA County is Orange County. It was named
for the orange groves that used to cover
the landscape of this area, including
the land that would eventually become
Disneyland. While this is a suburban
part of the Southern California region,
3 million people live in the OC, making
it more populous than 19 US states.
Within Orange County is Anaheim and
within Anaheim is Disneyland located
right here adjacent to Interstate 5.
Disney owns a variety of properties in
the area, including these parking lots
here, but the core resort area is this
rectangle. This area is the original
Disneyland Park and backstage areas
built in 1955. A lot of the original
organization of the park remains the
same, though attractions have changed or
been improved upon. One of the biggest
recent additions was Star Wars Galaxy's
Edge in 2019. Back in 1955 though, this
area down here was a big parking lot.
But in 2001, the company opened up a
second park, California Adventure.
Parking moved to adjacent blocks, and
today there are parking lots and garages
here and a large satellite lot back over
here. There's also the original
Disneyland Hotel across Disneyland
Drive. It's connected to the Prominade
between the two parks by Downtown
Disney, a shopping and dining area.
There's also another hotel that opened
with California Adventure called the
Grand Californiaiforn Hotel and Spa.
Finally, there's a third hotel, the
Pixar Place Hotel. That pretty much
covers the land uses on Disney's
property. Now, let's take a look at the
land uses around Disneyland. The entire
park and most of the hotels nearby are
in the Anaheim resort specific plan
area. In California, a specific plan is
a tool a city can use to create more
specific regulations for a defined area.
They're often used when developing a
brand new neighborhood with multiple
land uses. But the plan area here
doesn't include the housing directly
adjacent to Disney's property, which is
zoned as single family and multif family
residential. It looks like typical
California suburbs with smaller lot
single family homes and some attached
town homes and condos. The street
pattern is better than average with few
culde-sacs and neighborhoods with
multiple connections to the suburban
arterial grid network. It actually kind
of follows my favorite urban planning
graphic of all time from the journal
article, The Evolving Metropolis by
Michael Southworth and Peter Owens.
Let's look at it. These neighborhoods
were initially built in the 1950s and
1960s, and the street patterns are
similar to this graphic. Older suburbs
tend to be more connected than newer
ones, and you can see that here. Within
the Anaheim resort specific plan area,
we do have motel, hotels, strip malls,
and other tourist focused
establishments. They're obviously not
designed and built to the same standard
as Disneyland, but they honestly aren't
that tacky. The city has done a nice job
along Catella Avenue, creating a nice
walkable streetscape that masks some of
the disperate styles of the urbanism
along the corridor. You can also see
tons of people walking from their hotels
to Disneyland. It's common for people to
stay at an off Disney hotel, park their
car there, and walk to and from the
park. And while the streets that form
the edges of Disneyland, like Catella
and Harbor Boulevard, are wide and
filled with traffic, I didn't actually
find them terrible to walk along, thanks
to wide sidewalks and plenty of fellow
pedestrians around. I should also
mention another important land use, the
Anaheim Convention Center. It's the
largest convention facility on the West
Coast. It's also a great complent to
Disneyland as they both can take
advantage of the same tourist serving
amenities like restaurants and hotels.
Okay, so that's Disneyland. Let's take a
look at Walt Disney World in Florida.
It's located here about 20 m from
Orlando, Florida, a region with about
2.7 million people. Disney bought up
25,000 acres in Orange and Oyola
counties, which at the time was mostly
swamp with a promising road network,
easy access to an airport, and on the
other side of the country as Disneyland.
All useful for a successful resort.
Disney also founded the Reedi Creek
Improvement District, a special district
that essentially allowed the company to
have governmental control over the area,
similar to a county government. It's
recently been renamed the Central
Florida Tourism Oversight District in
part because Disney got into a battle
with Florida Governor Ron DeSantis and
he took control over the district.
Previously, the district was governed by
a five member board of supervisors.
Those supervisors were chosen by the
company and given a piece of land within
the district, making them the only
people to live in the district, meaning
they would get elected without being
contested. After Dantis changed the
district, the board members are now
chosen by the governor and confirmed by
the Florida Senate. But just before the
governor took control of the board, RCID
and the Disney Corporation signed a
development agreement that seated most
of the district's power to Disney
itself, meaning the new oversight board
only was responsible for things like
public roads. So now, as before, Disney
essentially governs itself over an
incredibly large swath of land. Let's
look at the land uses within the resort
property. While Disneyland has two
parks, Disney World has four. There's
the Magic Kingdom, the analog of the
Disneyland Park. Then Epcot, the
experimental prototype community of
Tomorrow. There's Disney Hollywood
Studios, and then Disney's Animal
Kingdom Resort. It's actually going to
be hard to name all the land uses within
the area as it's approximately the size
of a county and includes uses that make
it essentially its own separate city,
including a wastewater treatment center,
recycling center, fire stations, and
more. Disney has so far only developed
about half of the acreage under its
control. And about 1/3 or 8,000 acres of
land is actually never to be developed,
but instead protected in partnership
with the Nature Conservancy. This move
ensures that Disney development will
never be right up against any other
non-D Disney development like in
Anaheim. It's a green belt strategy.
Just like Anaheim, there are lots of
non-D Disney hotels in the area, but
they're not within walking distance.
Many have shuttles to transport their
guests to the Disney parks, but there
are certainly more vehicle miles
traveled associated with non-D Disney
guests visiting the parks. And honestly,
there's more VMT within the resort area,
too. Disney runs a massive fleet of
buses to shuttle everyone from hotels to
parks and back again. There are some
other options like the Montreal, but
even if all the transportation options
are sustainable, it's still way longer
to get from point A to point B in Disney
World than Disneyland. I actually found
Disneyland to be a really nice walkable
bubble. You can get to all the parks and
hotels by walking. In Disney World, you
can't. To accommodate all of this
driving from place to place, Disney
World has some massive parking lots. The
Magic Kingdom parking lot is one of the
top five largest parking lots in the
world with capacity for 12,000 vehicles.
It's bigger than the park itself.
Disneyland also has some parking lots,
but also some parking structures. The
Mickey and Friends parking structure has
a capacity for 10,000 cars, making it
one of the largest parking garages in
the world. But you'd rather have parking
in a structure than spread out across
the landscape of Central Florida. The
primary point of this comparison is to
rethink some of the discourse around the
Disney parks. Disneyland gets a lot of
flack for being embedded in suburbia,
but compared to Disney World,
Disneyland's location is downright
urban. I guess if you're a hardcore
Disney fan, you might appreciate how big
the Disney bubble is in Florida, but it
kind of feels like a lot of smaller
bubbles connected by buses. Disneyland
is a big walkable bubble that you can
actually walk to and from an affordable
hotel. And anytime that Disney World
expands, it feels like it's adding to
suburban sprawl. Whereas, when
Disneyland expands, it's essentially
infill development. Okay, so Disneyland
is a better theme park urban
planner-wise at least. But strip malls
and motel aren't exactly the best case
for adjacent land uses. There's still a
lot of people driving and parking in
massive parking garages and parking
lots. Is there an optimal setting for a
theme park? It's a difficult question to
answer, but I'm going to simplify things
by looking at only two dimensions.
Transportation and adjacent land uses.
Transportation first. Disneyland is
adjacent to Interstate 5 and Disney
World is adjacent to Interstate 4. These
are the primary ways guests reach the
parks. Ideally, a theme park would be on
a high-capacity transit stop, reducing
the need for highways and seas of
parking. Inefficient land uses that
raise the nearby temperature. It's just
bad for guest experience. It's also no
fun to walk through a parking lot. There
are theme parks out there that are on
transit lines, but they aren't in the
United States. Let's head over to Japan.
Tokyo Disney Resort has a metro stop
adjacent to it, and when visitors
arrive, they enter the resort gateway
area. From here, they can take a
Montreal to the two parks, Tokyo
Disneyland and Tokyo Disney Sea. There's
also a stop where guests can access all
of the hotels, thoughtfully organized
along the waterfront, yet still adjacent
to the parks. There are still cars
around. The resort has an exit on a
major highway, and there's a large
parking structure over here. Now, maybe
this is because I took a metro here when
I visited, but it really feels like the
park is more oriented to the transit
than the car. You surely don't need one
to get where you need to go. There are
also shuttles from the hotels. Now,
let's talk about land use. My favorite
topic. What do you want to surround a
park? Ideally, its other tourist serving
uses. Both American Disney resorts have
that and so too does Tokyo Disney
Resort. It only makes sense. Convention
centers, water parks, malls are all
synergistic land uses that keep tourists
in one place instead of spreading
everyone around. But eventually that
tourist district has to bump up against
other uses. Is there an optimal use?
Maybe it's because I'm pretty lazy fair
about zoning generally, but I think a
lot of uses could work well. If you look
at Disneyland, there are single family
homes adjacent to Disney property.
They're adjacent to the parking lots
now, but the recently approved
Disneyland 4 plan will see expansions to
both parks, putting residents a few
hundred feet from the Disney bubble. I
looked through the plan and the
community input. It seems like all the
impacts of that development can be
mitigated. Noise has been studied and it
looks like it shouldn't be a big issue.
Anaheim even has an elementary school
adjacent to some of the nearby hotels.
If you happen to live in this area, let
me know in the comments if it's a hassle
to live there. I imagine that the
tourists can be annoying, but I've been
into these actual neighborhoods and they
seem pretty chill. There are even single
family homes adjacent to Tokyo Disney
Resort. They're right over here. I mean,
I'm never going to advocate for single
family homes when you can build multif
family homes in an urban area, but
traditionally residents of single family
homes are the most sensitive to adjacent
uses. And here they are adjacent to
attractions that serve tens of millions
of visitors a year. On the other end of
the spectrum, Universal Studios Japan in
Osaka is plopped in the middle of an
industrial area near the harbor. It's
just surrounded by steel mills and
warehouses. I mean, I guess that works,
too. Though, honestly, I'd prefer strip
malls and motel. I guess what I'm saying
is that just about anything is better
than surrounding your park with nothing.
Theme parks can coexist with urban and
suburban uses. This also means that they
can synergize with other tourist uses
and be connected to mass transit
networks. There's nothing about them
that requires them to be in the middle
of nowhere, unless the park's creator is
hellbent on building a swamp moat around
the park to inflate its bubble. Like I
said, this video is just another among
many about Disney and urbanism. The City
Nerd video I mentioned is really good
and I recommend you check it out if you
haven't already. It's actually available
ad free on Nebula. Nebula is a streaming
service full of thoughtful creators
including me. We post exclusive content
there often well before it shows up on
YouTube. City Nerd is on Nebula. So too
is Not Just Bikes, Downey Live, Steuart
Hicks, Wendover Productions, and other
great cities and transportation
channels. It's like Urbanist Central on
Nebula. It's the best place to watch and
support those creators and the great
work that they're doing. I also wanted
to highlight Jetlag, a travel game show
produced by the Wendover crew. If you
haven't seen it yet, I highly recommend
it. It's funny, addictive, and built to
appeal to the City Beautiful viewer.
They've made over a dozen seasons and
more are on the way. If you like more
City Beautiful content, I've got
exclusive content on Nebula as well.
That includes my great city series. It
profiles some of the most iconic parts
of the world's most important cities. I
also produce Planning Ancient Rome, a
never-before-seen visual history of the
ancient city. It's some of my best work
because Nebula provided additional
resources, and it's only available on
that platform. In all, Nebula offers
you, the viewer, an ad-ree experience
filled with videos produced by a curated
group of thoughtful YouTubers. And those
thoughtful creators are also publishing
big budget, high-quality, exclusive
content. You can get all of this for a
surprisingly affordable price. If you
sign up with my link, nebula.tv/city,
TV/ city beautiful, you'll get 40% off
an annual subscription. My channel will
even get a portion of that subscription
fee as long as you save subscribed, so
it's the best way to support me and this
channel. Nebula also is offering
lifetime memberships for people who want
to go above and beyond in their support
of my channel and the platform. I love
that we have a couple of different ways
of allowing people to show their
support. And if you want to help others
support City Beautiful, Nebula now
offers gift memberships. Perfect for a
last minute birthday gift or just
something to give a loved one. So, thank
you so much for watching and supporting
this channel.